GLOSSARY for Orbital Mechanics: 
Companion to forthcoming 

"Discovering Orbits" 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M 

N O P Q R S T U V W x y z 

-A- 

Acceleration signifies the change in the rate of speed.  Gravitational 
attractors in the solar system have well-known masses and satellites 
have negligible mass, so it's often convenient to disregard the mass 
components when dealing with gravitational forces.  The metric 
units for acceleration are kiloms per second-squared.  ( km / sec2 ) 

AGA is an acronym for Adjusted Graphic Angle.  The AGA is the angle 
between the minRAY and the spacecraft.  It uses the geometric 
center of orbit for the its origin or angular fulcrum. 

Altitude is the shortest distance from the spacecraft to earth or lunar 
surface. 

Angles depict the sweeping motion around a central origin.  Orbital 
mechanics parse angles in the counter-clockwise direction from the 
minRAY point of orbit.  Angles are then measured in degrees, where 
360° makes a full circle. 

Angular momentum measures the area swept by the satellite's current 
radius around its gravity center.  Momentum for orbital mechanics 
has units of kiloms per second-squared.  ( km / sec2 ) 

Anomaly is the astronomer's term for angle.  In nonastronomical 
parlance, anomaly means quirk or strange or unexpected. 

 

Aphelion marks a satellite's far-point of orbit around the sun. 

Apoasis marks a satellite's far-point of orbit around a gravitational 
attractor. 

Apogee marks a satellite's far-point of orbit around the earth. 

Asteroids are smaller than planets and often called planetoids.  A 
majority of the larger asteroids are found between the orbits of Mars 
and Jupiter. 

AU is the acronym for Astronomical Unit or average distance between 
earth and sun. 

Autumnal Equinox is the moment of equal daylight and darkness at 
the end of summer.  At this time the earth is passing into the psign 
Seeing in its orbit around the sun. 

Average Speed marks the rate of distance covered during a full orbit.  
In other words, the average speed is the orbit's perimeter divided by 
its period.  It has units of kiloms per second.  ( km / sec ) 

Away angle refers to spacecraft in LEO traveling toward a lunar 
capture.  The away angle represents the diversionary path away 
from the straight line between earth and moon. 

Azimuth marks an object's horizontal direction.  The azimuth angle 
sweeps clockwise from zero degrees north.  90° points east; 180° 
points south, and 270° points west. 

Index. 

-B- 

BAL is short-form for Balance, which marks the 180° (-180°) angle from 
the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, BAL points to the six 
o'clock position.  See minRAY. 

Bode's Law is a formula that calculates the average distances of 
planetary orbits from closest to furthest away from the sun.  The 

 

formula uses a variation of the binomial power expansion: 20, 21, 22, 
23, 24 ... 

BTH is short-form for Breathing, which marks the 330° (-30°) angle 
from the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, BTH points to the one 
o'clock position.  See minRAY. 

Index. 

-C- 

Cartesian (x, y) coordinate system is a rectangular based reference 
which the origin signifies (0, 0) and positive X-values extend to the 
right of the origin, and positive Y-values extend upwards from the 
origin.  Negative values from X and Y extend left and down 
respectively. 

Celestial equator is the imaginary great circle around the earth, which 
lies on level with the earth's orbit around the sun i.e. the plane of the 
ecliptic. 

Celsius scale is a measurement of temperature where 0° Celsius equals 
the freezing point of water and 100° Celsius equals the boiling point 
of water.  20° Celsius is comfortable; 30° Celsius of balmy hot; 10° 
Celsius is chilly cool. 

Center of gravity is the gravitational center of a massive object, such as 
a star or planet.  Center of gravity represents the origin (the prime 
focus point) of an orbiting satellite.  By ignoring gravitational 
influences from other massive objects, you may simplify orbital 
calculations to the "Two-Body" problem, which is relatively simple. 

NOTE: All calculations in Discovering Orbits and/or TryOrbit 
Lunar assume the earth or moon are perfectly spherical with a 
homogeneous distribution of mass therein. 

   

Centrifugal Force pushes against outer frame of a spinning disk.  
Centrifugal force acts away from the center of spin. 

 

Centripetal force counterbalances the speed of a spacecraft, which 
wants to continue moving in a straight line.  Centripetal force acts 
toward the gravitational attractor. 

Cislunar signifies the volume in and around the sun-moon system. 

Combined Speed refers to noncircular orbits where the satellite's 
speed has two components: Dynamic Circular Speed (DCS) and 
Dynamic Stretch Speed (DSS).  The ratios of DCS and DSS vary during 
the course of an orbit. 

Comets originate in the outer solar system and fall towards the sun 
where they move rapidly, making sharp U-turns, before they retreat 
back to whence they came.  Comets consist of significant portions of 
frozen waterlike volatiles that heat up and vaporize as the comets 
near the sun.  This phenomenon creates spectacular comet tails for 
observers on earth. 

Constellations signify special groups of stars which have been given 
fanciful names by skywatchers thousands of years ago.  
Constellations may also refer to groups of satellites that orbit in a 
complex pattern or in staggered fashion along the self-same orbital 
path. 

Coordinate systems are of two kinds: the Cartesian coordinate system 
and the polar coordinate system.  Each system will nail down an 
object in two- or three-dimensional space.  Polar spherical 
coordinates are more familiar to folks.  3-D positions coincide with 
angular values on two perpendicular great circles, plus a distance 
from the origin to the direction implied.  Orbital mechanics find (X, Y, 
Z) spherical coordinates are easier to manipulate, but the values 
rendered are more difficult to grasp. 

Coriolis effect arises from a spinning environment.  The faster the spin, 
the more pronounced the effect.  The earth spins very slow, once 
around every 24 hours, hence the effect is barely noticeable.  
Hurricanes spin clockwise in the northern hemisphere, and they spin 

 

counter-clockwise in the southern hemisphere.  Undisturbed water 
going down a drain will create a clockwise vortex in the northern 
hemisphere and a counterclockwise vortex in the southern 
hemisphere. 

Space stations that spin to simulate gravity will experience more 
pronounced Coriolis effects if the period of spin is less than a minute.  
Someone who has never thrown a curve ball will find the trajectories 
of normal throws curving like crazy.  Even cats will have to adapt to 
novel conditions before they can land on their feet. 

Coriolis force derives from the Coriolis effect.  See Coriolis effect. 

COS is short-form for cosine, which functions only for right triangles 
where the hypotenuse equals one.  The cosine of an angle is the ratio 
of the X-side over the hypotenuse. 

Cosmic rays are highly charged elemental particles arriving from deep 
space.  Cosmic rays are unhealthy for biological species, but the rays 
arrive too infrequently to cause undue concern. 

CRD is short-form for Coordinating, which is the 240° (-120°) angle 
from the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, CRD points to the four 
o'clock position. 

Index. 

-D- 

Day length is the time elapsed from midnight to midnight—how we 
normally reckon a day.  Astronomers call this the mean solar day, 
which is how days are counted in Discovering Orbits.  However, in the 
Show-Picture window of TryOrbit Lunar, the radial lines drawn 
inside the earth signify sidereal time.  The mean solar day is longer 
than one rotation of earth (or sidereal day) because the earth travels 
on its orbit (as it rotates) and faces the sun at an advanced angle.  
Thus the earth must rotate a small amount extra to catch the sun at 
sunrise. 

 

• Sidereal day in mean solar time  =  23h/ 56m/ 4.09s 
• Mean solar day in sidereal time  =  24h/ 3m/ 56.56s 

DCS is an acronym for Dynamic Circular Speed.  DCS is a speed 
component 90° to the current radius of the satellite in the direction 
the satellite is orbiting.  If DCS signifies 100% of the orbiting speed, 
the orbit will be circular.  See Diagram. 

Deceleration marks the slowing down of a speeding object.  Its units 
are negative km / sec2. 

Degree is a unit of angular measure.  360° represents a full circle. 

Delta-V is the energy required to change a spacecraft onto a new orbit.  
Delta-V also represents the energy required to lift off from earth or 
moon and achieve orbital speed.  Delta-V has the following units: 
kiloms-squared /over/ seconds-squared.   (km2 / sec2 )  For minor 
accelerations or decelerations, orbital mechanics may use meters-
squared /over/ seconds-squared.  (m2 / sec2 ) 

diameter is the straight-line that passes through the center of a circle 
and extends from edge to edge.  For ellipses, the diameter length will 
vary depending on where the diameter is drawn. 

dimensions apply to geometric environments.  A point has no 
dimensions.  A line has one dimension.  A plane has two dimensions.  
A volume or space has three dimensions.  Spacetime has four 
dimensions.  Fortunately, orbits occupy two dimensions only, which 
simplify many problems of orbital mechanics. 

Diurnal motion covers the observed travel of a satellite or planet over 
a 24-hour period. 

DSS is an acronym for Dynamic Stretch Speed.  DSS is the speed 
component that causes circular orbits to stretch into elliptic orbits.  
DSS extends along the current radius of a satellite either inward or 
outward from the gravitational center of attraction.  See Diagram. 

Dynamic means motion or changeable activity. 

 

Index. 

-E- 

Earth is the 3rd-planet of the solar system. 
• Earth has a radius of 6378.15 kiloms. 
• Earth masses at —>  597 * 1022 kilograms.  Where 1022 kilograms 

equals the mass of 377-billion Three Gorges Dams, the heftiest 
structure built by humans to date. 

• Earth's majA distance from the sun  =  one AU. 
• Earth's mean orbiting speed  =  29.785 km/sec 

Eccentric anomaly is an intermediary angle sweeping from the 
geometric center of orbit.  Discovering Orbits uses the term midE 
angle for the eccentric anomaly.  See midE angle. 

Eccentricity gauges the elliptic stretch of an orbit.  Discovering Orbits 
uses the term Exp (expander) for the eccentricity.  See Exp. 

Ecliptic is the plane of earth's orbit around the sun. 

Ellipses are the locus of points on a plane where sum of distances from 
a satellite to each focus point returns a constant value.  An ellipse 
includes circular orbits as well as elongated cometary orbits.  The 
algebraic formula for an ellipse is...  (x/a)2  +  (y/b)2   =   one 

Elliptic theorem states that  A2  =  B2  +  C2.  This is a classic right 
triangle where 
•  A  =  majA (semi-major axis); 
•  B  =  minB (semi-minor axis); 
•  C  =  hfdC (half of the distance between focal points). 

Energy moves an object from its inertial state.  The energy of orbit is 
proportional to the majA of orbit.  Energy has units of kiloms-
squared /over/ seconds-squared.  ( km2 / sec2 ) 

Equatorial orbit means a satellite tracks above the earth's equator and 
stays on the equatorial plane. 

 

Equatorial plane is a great circle that extends as far as needed on the 
plane of the earth's equator. 

Exp is short-form for Expander, which is measured from zero to almost 
one for elliptic orbits.  The Exp equals one for parabolic flightpaths 
and greater than one from hyperbolic flightpaths.  The Exp has no 
units per se. 

Index. 

-F- 

Flightpath is the tangent to the orbital arc of the satellite in the 
direction of motion.  It is the angle between the DSS and the Speed 
arrow. 

Flightpath angle equals 90° minus the angle of the velocity vector.  For 
geometers the flightpath angle is "complimentary" to the velocity 
angle. 

Focus points are two for every elliptic orbit.  The prime focus point is 
the gravitational center, which lies on the major axis.  The secondary 
focus point lies also on the major axis at an equal and opposite 
direction from the geometric center.  For circular orbits, the focus 
points and geometric center converge to same place. 

Force equates with gravity or rocket boost.  It changes the static 
momentum of spacecraft in orbit.  Since satellite mass is very small 
compared to its gravitational attractor, the mass component can be 
ignored.  The effect of force is then described in units of kiloms 
/over/ seconds-squared. 

FPA is the acronym for FlightPath Angle. 

Frame-of-reference for orbital mechanics is a flat plane surrounding a 
gravitational attractor.  The center of gravity marks the prime focus 
point.  For some orbital calculations, it is often necessary to move the 
origin from the geometric center of orbit to the gravitational center 

 

of orbit and vice versa.  To do this, you add or subtract the hfdC to 
the orbital parameters. 

Freefloat is a term coined by John A. Wheeler.  The speed of spacecraft 
in orbit balances the force of gravity so that astronauts feel 
weightless.  Likewise a person falling from a tall building 
experiences weightlessness.  If it would be possible to stand at the 
exact center of earth, one would experience the same 
weightlessness.  Freefloat describes the same thing a scuba diver 
feels when he has adjusted his ballast to evoke weightlessness in 
water. 

Friction causes earthside vehicles to slow down.  Friction of the wheel 
bearings, friction of the tires and friction of air molecules in the 
atmosphere require constant force to maintain the speed of moving 
vehicles, otherwise the fuel in your gas tank would stay topped-up 
for years and years.  In outer space, friction is negligible so that a 
spacecraft will circle earth almost indefinitely. 

Index. 

-G- 

GEO is short-form for geosynchronous orbit—a flightpath where the 
satellite orbits at the same speed as the earth spins.  Comsats are 
often placed in geosynchronous orbits so that ground stations can 
open continuous relay channels with the satellite. 

Geometric center is at the center of the ellipse.  The point lies midway 
between the elliptic focus points, if they are separated.  The 
geometric center is the origin and fulcrum for the midE angle. 

Geocentric means earth-centered.  Some telescopes include real-time 
maps that set all planets and planetoids in the solar system to a 
geocentric frame-of-reference, so that amateur astronomers can aim 
automatically to their points of interest.  If humans inhabit 
permanent colonies away from earth, the geocentric view may well 

 

be replaced with other frames-of-reference. 

GP is the acronym for Gravitational Parameter.  GP has been calculated 
accurately for all major bodies of the solar system, so orbital 
mechanics know from the speed, direction and radius of a spacecraft 
what sort of orbit it will assume. 

GPS is the acronym for Global Positioning Satellites.  Three satellites 
triangulate transponder signals for a hiker in the outback.  In this 
way, they can nail the hiker's location with remarkable accuracy.  
Commercial airplane pilots use GPS to guide their aircraft through 
the mid-portions of their flights. 

Gravitational attractor is any massive body that exerts gravity and 
causes a speeding spacecraft to curve around its attraction. 

Gravitational center resides at the center of mass of the gravitational 
attractor.  For orbiting satellites, this origin equates with the prime 
focus point. 

Gravitational parameter tells an orbital mechanic how a spacecraft 
will react around a gravitational attractor.  Scientists believe gravity 
acts the same anywhere in the universe.  Thus gravity is a constant 
that varies only according to the mass of the gravitational attractor.  
Since the masses of major bodies of the solar system have been 
calculated to remarkable accuracy, you can ignore the amount of 
mass in the equation and describe the gravitational parameter for 
earth or moon in terms of volume contortion /over/ the rate of time 
elapsed.  Thus, the gravitational parameter has units of kilometers-
cubed /over/ seconds-squared. 
• Mercury GP        =         21,680 km3 / sec2 
• Venus GP           =        325,000 km3 / sec2 
• Earth GP           =         398,600 km3 / sec2 
• Mars GP           =            42,970 km3 / sec2 
• Jupiter GP    =     126,700,000 km3 / sec2 
• Saturn GP      =      37,900,000 km3 / sec2 
• Uranus GP      =       5,790,000 km3 / sec2 

 

• Neptune GP      =     6,805,000 km3 / sec2 

Gravity-well is a descriptive term that illustrates how an orbiting 
satellite has a great amount of potential energy, which must be 
forfeited when a spacecraft deorbits to earth or lunar surface.  A 
spacecraft in minimum earth orbit has acquired half the Delta-V 
needed to travel anywhere in the solar system. 

GVT is short-form for Gravity, which marks the 270° (-90°) angle from 
the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, GVT points to the three 
o'clock position. 

Index. 

-H- 

Hectare is a measure of area. 
•  One hectare equals 2.471 acres. 
•  One hectare equals 107,639.1 square feet. 
•  One hectare equals 11,959.9 square yards. 
•  One hectare equals 10,000 square meters. 
•  One hectare equals .01 square kilometers. 

HEO is an acronym for High Earth Orbit.  It means any orbit beyond 
GEO.  The moon is an example of HEO as well as L4 or L5. 

hfdC is short-form for half of the distance between elliptic focus points.  
hfdC forms one of the sides of the elliptic triangle. 

HRG is short-form for Hearing, which signifies the 30° (-330°) angle 
from the minRAY point of orbit.  With old-style clocks, HRG points at 
the eleven o'clock position. 

Hypotenuse is the side of right triangle opposite the 90° angle.  It is the 
longest side but shorter than X-side plus the Y-side.  The 
hypotenuse-squared equals the X-side-squared plus the Y-side-
squared. 
•  H2  =   X2 +  Y2 

 

Index. 

-I- 

Inclination refers to the slant of the orbital plane.  The Inclination angle 
gauges how far the orbital plane slants away from the ecliptic or 
earth equator. 

Inertia is the crux of Newton's 1st-law of motion: A body will continue 
in its present state of motion until an outside force acts to change it. 

Interval of thrust measures the duration of rocket boost needed to 
achieve the desired delta-V.  If the rocket boost delivers 5% of the 
delta-V per second, astronauts will have to fire their rocket for 20 
seconds. 

Intercept angle signifies the optimal angle to approach a gravity-well.  
If you want a spacecraft to go into quasi-circular orbit around Mars 
or Venus, you must dip lightly into its atmosphere several times to 
burn off the excess approach speed.  Eventually the spacecraft will 
match the proper orbiting speed for the gravity-well.  Since the moon 
has no atmosphere, the spacecraft can only achieve a capture orbit, 
which will probably be highly elliptic.  Then you fire reverse 
thrusters at the minRAY point to circularize the orbit.  If the 
intercept angle is too steep, the spacecraft will crash into the 
gravitational attractor.  If the intercept angle is too wide, the 
spacecraft will hook around the gravity-well and zoom off elsewhere. 

Index. 

-J- 

Jupiter is the 5th-planet of the solar system. 
• Jupiter radius  =  71,398 kiloms. 
• Jupiter masses at —>  190,000 * 1022 kilograms.  Where 1022 

kilograms equals the mass of 377-billion Three Gorges Dams, the 
heftiest structure built by humans to date. 

 

• Jupiter majA distance from the sun = 5.203 AU. 
• Jupiter mean orbiting speed  =  13 kiloms / second. 

Index. 

-K- 

Kilogram is a unit mass that equals 2.2 pounds, like hefting a quart of 
milk. 
• One kilogram equals 1,000 grams. 
• 1,000 kilograms equal one metric tonne. 

Kilom(s) is short-form for kilometer(s). 

Kinetic is the dynamic form of energy.  Gas in a vehicle's tank 
represents potential energy.  When it's burned, it transforms into 
kinetic energy which sets the vehicle in motion. 

Index. 

-L- 

Latitude represents the spherical angle away from the earth's equator.  
North or positive latitude signifies the angle north of the equator.  
South or negative latitude signifies the angle south of the equator.  
Astronomers use latitude as one of the great circles that pinpoint 
objects in space. 

Launch module is the wherewithal needed to launch a spacecraft or 
satellite into orbit.  The launch module contains the protective outer 
skin, the rocket motor, the fuel stocks and the payload capsule. 

LEO is an acronym for Low Earth Orbit.  LEO orbits range from 250 
kiloms in altitude to 800 kiloms in altitude.  In this way, the 
spacecraft is protected from solar radiation inside earth's ionic belt. 

Libration means back and forth motion due to the earth's wobble on its 
axis. 

 

Longitude is the spherical angle east or west from the Greenwich prime 
meridian.  Astronomers describe longitude as right ascension and 
use it as one of the great circles that pinpoint objects in space.  Right 
ascension is measured in 360° and represents a spacial framework 
of sidereal time. 

Index. 

-M- 

Main Windows for TryOrbit Lunar are: 
• Show-Picture Window (satellite in animation) 
• Results Window (Orbital Data) 
• Speed-Graph Window (two views) 

majA is short-form for semi-major axis, which is half the of the longest 
diameter of the orbital ellipse. 

Mars is the 4th-planet of the solar system. 
• Mars radius  =  3,380 kiloms. 
• Mars masses at —>  64 * 1022 kilograms.  Where 1022 kilograms 

equals the mass of 377-billion Three Gorges Dams, the heftiest 
structure built by humans to date. 

• Mars majA distance from sun  =  1.524 AU. 

Maximum Altitude of an orbit occur at the maxRAY point. 

Maximum orbiting speed occurs at the minRAY point. 

Mass measures an object size and density.  Whereas weight gauges an 
object's heft in earth's gravity, the same object will seem weightless 
in the freefloat environment.  Mass remains the same no matter how 
strong gravity is.  To change an object's inertia will require 
substantial force, even in weightless conditions. 

maxRAY signifies the longest radius of an elliptic orbit. 

Mean Anomaly represents the 360° angle of orbital period.  Discovering 
Orbits calls the mean anomaly the TIME angle.  See TIME Angle. 

 

Mercury is the 1st-planet of the solar system. 
• Mercury radius  =  2,439 kiloms. 
• Mercury masses at  —>  33 * 1022 kilograms.  Where 1022 

kilograms equals the mass of 377-billion Three Gorges Dams, the 
heftiest structure built by humans to date. 

• Mercury majA distance from the sun  =  .387 AU. 

midE Angle is measured from the origin of the geometric center of 
orbit.  It sketches a circle of radius majA and meets the actual orbital 
path at two places: minRAY and maxRAY.  The midE angle is the go-
between the TIME angle and the POSITION angle. 

minB is short-form for semi-minor axis, which is half the length of the 
shortest diameter of the orbital ellipse. 

Minimum Altitude of an orbit occurs at the minRAY point. 

Minimum orbiting speed occurs at the maxRAY or far-point of orbit. 

minRAY is the minimum radius of orbit.  It occurs at zero degrees of the 
POSITION, midE and TIME angles.  The minRAY crossing signals the 
end of one orbital cycle and the beginning of the next. 

Moon's orbiting speed is 1.0183 kiloms per second on average.  It 
varies as much as 5% from norm, depending its POSITION of orbit 
and distance from earth. 

MOV is short-form for Moving, which marks the 300° (-60°) angle from 
the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, MOV points to the two 
o'clock position. 

Index. 

-N- 

Neptune is the 8th-planet of the solar system. 
• Neptune radius  =  24,300 kiloms. 
• Neptune masses at —>  10,200 * 1022 kilograms.  Where 1022 

kilograms equals the mass of 377-billion Three Gorges Dams, the 

 

heftiest structure built by humans to date. 
• Neptune majA distance from the sun  =  30.11 AU. 

Newton’s 1st-law of motion: Objects stay in their inertial state unless 
acted upon by an outside force.  A body at rest will stay at rest.  A 
body in motion will stay in motion on its present course. 

Newton's 2nd-law of motion: An object's momentum changes in 
proportion to the force acting on it.  Orbital momentum is expressed 
in units of kilograms times kiloms-squared per second.  (kg * km2 / 
sec) 

NOTE: TryOrbit Lunar uses 100 hectares in place of one kilom-
squared. 

Newton's 3rd-law of motion: Every action as an equal and opposite 
reaction.  Combustive fuel that is pushed out of the rear of a 
spacecraft propels the spacecraft forward in directly proportion to 
the mass of the fuel and the speed of its exit. 

Index. 

-O- 

Oblate earth means the earth isn't a perfect sphere.  Earth is flattened 
at the poles and resembles an ellipsoid.  This means that gravity 
pulls somewhat less for satellites that pass over the poles compared 
to satellites that track along earth's equator.  Discovering Orbits 
assumes the earth is a perfect sphere and doesn't take into account 
the subtle perturbations due to earth's gravitational anomalies.  All 
orbits made with TryOrbit Lunar are only accurate for about ten to 
fifteen days beyond their initial parametric constraints.  Nonetheless, 
you will gain a good ballpark estimate of how orbits behave, given 
their initial parameters.  In fact, Discovering Orbits will give you 
better orbital know-how than many sci-fi authors who fudge the 
known laws of physics. 

Operators act on the parameters of algebraic equations.  The most 

 

common operators are add, subtract, multiply and divide.  Throw in 
elementary trig functions, and you have all the math operators you 
need to understand rocket science in theory and practice.  
Discovering Orbits uses the following symbols: 
• The symbol  *  means multiply. 
• The symbol  +  means add. 
• The symbol  -  means subtract. 
• The symbol  /  means divide. 
• The symbols  (  )  mean do the calculations inside before doing 

the calculations outside.  For example, the expression  3 * (2 + 2)  
means add two & two and then multiply by 3, which equals 12, 
which proves a sasquatch has more toes than you do. 

Orbits are the closest natural phenomena to perpetual motion.  Once 
satellites are lofted into stable orbits, they keep going around 
without assistance. 

Orbiting energy is directly proportional to the majA of orbit.  The 
larger the majA, the slower the orbiting speed, and the greater the 
energy of orbit.  The more area enclosed within an orbital track, the 
greater portion of the energy is potential.  Think of the bicycle rider 
who has huffed and puffed up a steep hill.  He or she sits at the 
summit and looks forward to enjoying the gift of potential energy on 
the way down. 

Orbital mechanics marks the way to maneuver a spacecraft to best 
effect, to accomplish a mission in the least time with the least fuel 
expended.  After you read through Discovering Orbits you will 
become a competent orbital mechanic. 

Index. 

-P- 

Parabolic curves mark spacecraft with minimum escape speed from 
their local gravity-well.  Some comets come close to resembling 

 

parabolic flightpaths.  After their close encounter with sun, they 
return to the outer solar system way beyond the orbit of Neptune.  
Some of them won't return to inner solar system for thousands of 
years.  A parabolic flightpath has a Exp value equal to one.  A 
spacecraft on collision course toward a gravitational attractor also 
has a Exp value of one.  You need common sense to distinguish one 
from the other. 

Parameters are variable numeric values that turn general equations 
into specific instances returning specific results.  If a percentage of 
your income goes to the taxman, you have to make do with whatever 
remaining income remains at hand.  Suppose we introduce a new 
parameter, such as a winning ticket in the lottery.  You spending 
plans will suddenly find many new opportunities.  Orbital equations 
work the same way.  If you set generous initial parameters, you will 
have more choices of flightpaths that will fulfill your mission. 

Parking orbit means a roughly circular orbit around a gravitational 
attractor.  A parking orbit has a modest altitude enabling a possible 
deorbit to the attractor's surface.  Likewise, the spacecraft retains 
enough potential energy to facilitate an escape from the gravity-well 
if such action is desired. 

Payload includes all parts of the launch module the makes it into orbit.  
It includes the electronic package, the solar collector wings, the 
antenna, the spacecraft protective shell, maneuvering rockets and 
reserve fuel, extra shielding for sensitive science packages and 
occasionally the upper stage of the launch booster. 

Periapsis marks the minRAY point or shortest altitude of orbit. 

Perigee marks the closest approach of an orbit around earth. 

Perihelion signifies the shortest radius of an orbit around the sun. 

Period represents the time span of one complete orbit.  It equates with 
360° of the TIME angle.  The period has units of seconds. 

The period equals 2 * PI * SQR( majA * majA  * majA / GP ) 

 

Where * means multiply by 
and SQR means "Take the Square Root of." 

Perpendicular means at 90° to a line or plane. 

Perturbations represent 3rd-party intrusions on an orbital path.  They 
included the nonspherical composition of earth, the gravitational 
effects of the sun, moon and Jupiter for earth-based orbits.  For lunar 
orbits add the gravitational tides of earth. 

PI is a natural constant  =  3.141592653589793238462643383279… 

Polar coordinates consist of planar or spherical angles and the radius of 
the spacecraft. 

POSITION angle advances rapidly near the minRAY and slowly near the 
maxRAY.  It has its origin and fulcrum at the gravitational center of 
orbit.  The POSITION angle sweeps out equal areas in equal times. 

Pythagoras is the so-called originator of the right-angle theorem on 
which trigonometry is based.  However, evidence suggests Egyptian 
surveyor-astrologers understood the right-angle theorem 1,000 years 
before Pythagoras was born.  For any right triangle, the longest side is 
called the hypotenuse opposite the 90° angle.  The hypotenuse-
squared equals the X-side-squared plus the Y-side-squared. 
• H2  =   X2 +  Y2 

Index. 

-Q- 

Quadrants divide the 360° circle into four equal parts.  The 1st-quadrant 
includes angles from zero to 90° (x-positive, y-positive).  The 2nd-
quandrant includes angles from 90° to 180° (x-negative, y-positive).  
The 3rd-quadrant includes angles from 180° to 270° (x-negative, y-
negative).  The 4th-quadrant includes angles from 270° to 360° (x-
positive, y-negative). 

Queue overflow occurs in TryOrbit Lunar when more than 2,047 orbits 

 

are loaded in a current session.  TryOrbit Lunar will automatically 
save these to the default file. 

NOTE: If you use TryOrbit Lunar with 64-bit Windows systems, 
Windows may not let you save custom orbits to disk.  If it does, you 
will only have access to one file called Userorb.d06.  Userorb.d06 has 
a capacity much larger than 2,047, but it is NOT unlimited.  If you fill 
the file to capacity, it will no longer accept custom orbits. 

Index. 

-R- 

Radian angles are those measured in 2 * PI radians instead of 360°.  To 
convert degrees to radians multiply by PI / 180.  To convert radians 
into degrees multiply by 180 / PI.  Digital trigonometry is best done 
with radian angles.  Then you convert the answers back to degrees. 

Radius is the distance from the satellite to the gravitational center.  For 
elliptic orbits, the radius will change for different positions in the 
orbit. 

Radial velocity is the same thing as the DSS component.  See DSS. 

Retrograde motion is the side effect of observing celestial bodies from a 
moving, spinning earth.  There are times when observers on earth 
will see planets and/or earth-based satellites apparently moving 
backward or retrograde.  This backtracking is an optical illusion.  
Satellites or planets do NOT reverse direction, they merely appear to 
do so, because they are tracking slower than earth's spin or orbital 
motion. 

Right-angle theorem works for all triangles in which one corner forms a 
90° angle.  The side opposite the 90° angle is the longest side and is 
called the hypotenuse.  For convenience, trigonometric tables put the 
hypotenuse at one unit of length.  Then the theorem holds that the X-
side-squared equals the Y-side-squared equals the hypotenuse-
squared. 

 

•  X2  +  Y2  =  12  or  one. 

Right ascension is an astronomical term for longitude.  Right ascension 
is both directional and time dependent.  By using sidereal tables, the 
astronomer can orient himself or herself at the point of interest in 
the night sky. 

Index. 

-S- 

SAM is the acronym for Static Angular Momentum.  SAM is a constant 
for all orbits.  SAM is similar but not the same as energy of orbit.  It 
has units of kiloms-squared per second. 

Satellites orbit around gravitational attractors, their rotational 
momentum matching the inward pulls of the gravity-wells.  The 
flightpath of a satellite is inertial.  It continues to follow the laws of 
orbital dynamics until an external force is exerted, such as the firing 
of rocket engines or the drag of atmospheric friction. 

Saturn is 6th-planet of the solar system. 
• Saturn radius  =  60,369 kiloms. 
• Saturn masses at —> 56,800 * 1022 kilograms.  Where 1022 

kilograms equals the mass of 377-billion Three Gorges Dams, the 
heftiest structure built by humans to date. 

• Saturn majA distance from the sun  =  9.555 AU. 

SEE is short-form for Seeing, which marks the zero (360°) angle for the 
minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, SEE points to the twelve o'clock 
position. 

semP is short-form for semi-parameter.  The semP is the radius line 
from the gravitational center straight up to the satellite's orbital 
path. 

Sidereal day is the length of time for the earth to rotate on its axis.  
Astronomers call this "right ascension."  The sidereal day is 

 

somewhat less than the mean solar day that we use to denote day 
lengths. 
• Sidereal day in mean solar time  =  23h/ 56m/ 4.09s 
• Mean solar day in sidereal time  =  24h/ 3m/ 56.56s 

SIN is the acronym for sine, which functions only for right triangles 
where the hypotenuse equals one.  The sine of an angle is the ratio of 
the Y-side over the hypotenuse. 

SML is short-form for Smell, which marks the 60° (-300°) angle from the 
minRAY.  With old-style clocks, SML points to the ten o'clock 
position. 

Solar rays are charged particles (X-rays) blown off from the sun's 
fusion furnace.  Solar rays are dangerous to human health.  
Fortunately, the earth's magnetic shield blocks most of the solar rays 
from reaching the biosphere where we live.  However, solar rays can 
be hazardous to folks who live and work in outer space.  Protective 
shielding is recommended for off-earth habitats. 

Solar sails use light pressure in the same way as sailing ships use wind 
for propulsion.  Because solar-sail craft require little or no fuel, they 
are excellent choices for long-range travel in the solar system.  They 
have few moving parts, so they might be the most reliable and 
durable spacecraft in the universe.  Solar-sail craft need extra time to 
get up to speed.  Once they start cruising, their ETAs compare 
favorably with rocket-powered craft.  Solar sails have one big 
disadvantage.  They are next to useless when they venture deep into 
gravity-wells.  It takes them months to crawl out LEO, but at HEO 
orbits they can gain near-escape speeds within days or weeks. 

Solstices are the longest and shortest days of the year.  The most 
daylight happens around June 21st, and least daylight happens 
around December 21st. 

Spacecraft is any fabricated craft that is launched above earth's 
atmosphere.  If the spacecraft settles into orbit, it becomes a satellite 

 

of earth.  If it escapes earth's gravity-well, it becomes a probe of the 
solar system.  If it journeys outside the solar system, it becomes an 
inter-stellar probe.  The spacecraft may or may not carry humans 
onboard. 

Spring equinox signals the time of equal daylight and darkness.  It is 
often called the vernal equinox.  The spring equinox occurs at the 
moment the earth enters the psign BAL or 180° from the minRAY 
point. 

SPS is the acronym for Solar-Powered Satellite.  75 years ago, Nikola 
Tesla envisioned an era of cheap and clean energy, when solar 
collectors in geosynchronous orbit would beam microwaves to earth 
and thereby power the world's electric grid.  So far, no government 
has had the gumption to make this dream a reality. 

SQR is short-form for "take the square root of."  SQR is a mathematical 
operator.  It means calculate the numerical root, which when 
multiplied by itself, returns the original number.   

Sun is our luminous star.  It contains a lion's share of the mass in the 
solar system.  The sun orbits around the gravitational center of the 
Milky Way galaxy and takes all objects of the solar system in its train. 

Index. 

-T- 

TAN is short-form for tangent, which functions only for right triangles 
where the hypotenuse equals one.  The tangent of an angle equals 
the ratio of the Y-side over the X-side.  ( Y / X ) 

Tangential velocity means the same thing as the DCS component.  See 
DCS. 

TCH is short-form for Touch, which marks the 150° (-210°) angle from 
the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, TCH points to the seven 
o'clock position. 

 

Thrust is combustive fuel that is jettisoned by a spacecraft.  The 
exhaust from the fuel powers a spacecraft forward in the opposite 
direction from which the exhaust expels. 

TIME angle sweeps 360° in synch with an orbit's period.  For 
geosynchronous orbits, one degree of the TIME angle equals about 
four minutes gone by on your watch.  Most orbits have periods far 
less or greater than a day.  The degrees of the TIME angle adjust to 
whatever orbital period you may wish to examine. 

Trigonometry is based on the right-angle theorem.  You don't need to 
futz around with vectors or matrices.  Just use the right-angle 
theorem and a morsel of common sense.  This simple equation 
produces tables that match angular values to triangular side ratios.  
Most computer systems offer a calculator applet that produces sine, 
cosine and tangent ratios for almost any angle imaginable.  When 
minimal parameters are known, trigonometry lets you find the 
unknowns of a triangle or other geometric objects.  Moreover, trig 
functions work in three dimensions almost as well as they work in 
two dimensions.  See Quadrants. 

True anomaly means the same thing as POSITION angle.  See POSITION 
angle. 

TST is short-form for Taste, which marks the 120° (-240°) angle from 
the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, TST points to the eight 
o'clock position. 

Turning angle results when a free-wheeling spacecraft encounters 
gravity-well.  Three things can happen. 
• The spacecraft skims the gravity-well enough for the attractor to   

capture it.  Then the spacecraft becomes a satellite in orbit 
around the gravity-well 

• The spacecraft dives too deeply into the gravity-well and crashes 
into the massive attractor. 

• The spacecraft skims the gravity-well, but the attractor cannot 
capture it because the spacecraft is going too fast.  In effect, the 

 

spacecraft makes a hyperbolic flyby during which the attractor 
changes the spacecraft's directional flightpath.  In other words, 
the spacecraft acquires the attractor's orbiting speed as it exits 
the system, although its intrinsic speed remains unchanged, 
going in and going out.  This change of direction is called the 
turning angle. 

Index. 

-U- 

Units are a very important check on the accuracy of your calculations.  
As you crunch the numbers, do the same for the units.  You should 
end up with distances expressed in kiloms, speeds expressed in 
kiloms per second and parameters like Exp expressed in no units at 
all.  If the units match up correctly, you know you have used the right 
equations.  If there are still errors, they must be errors of arithmetic. 

Uranus is the 7th-planet of the solar system. 
• Uranus radius  =  25,400 kiloms. 
• Uranus masses at —>  8,670 * 1022 kilograms.  Where 1022 

kilograms equals the mass of 377-billion Three Gorges Dams, the 
heftiest structure built by humans to date. 

• Uranus majA distance from the sun  =  19.218 AU. 

URG is short-form for Urgency, which marks the 90° (-270°) angle from 
the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, URG points to the nine 
o'clock position. 

Index. 

-V- 

Van Allen belt is an ionic shroud around earth, which occurs at an 
altitude of about 1,000 kiloms.  Earth's magnetic field causes this 
protective layer named after its discoverer. 

 

Vectors are numerical values that have direction as well as magnitude, 
even if it just means having a plus or minus sign attached.  It makes a 
difference if your rocket exhaust points away from the gravity 
attractor or toward it.  If you're hungry, you want to move toward 
the refrigerator not away from it.  Direction adds real-world 
significance to a numerical expression. 

Venus is the 2nd-planet of the solar system. 
• Venus radius  =  6,052 kiloms. 
• Venus masses at —>  4,87 * 1022 kilograms.  Where 1022 

kilograms equals the mass of 377-billion Three Gorges Dams, the 
heftiest structure built by humans to date. 

• Venus majA distance from the sun  =  .728 AU. 

Index. 

-W- 

WRM is short-form for Warmth, which marks the 210° (-150°) angle 
away from the minRAY point.  With old-style clocks, WRM points to 
the five o'clock position. 

 

Index. 

 

 

Back. 

 

 

Back. 

 

 

